JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: the
travel ban at the Supreme Court.
Justices agree parts of
President Trump's controversial
executive order can start now,
and will hear the
full case in the fall.
Then: Senate Republicans
scramble to keep their health
care bill alive, releasing a
revised measure amid wavering
support from within the party.
And the first part
of my conversation
with Warren Buffett.
We discuss inequality in
the U.S. and America's
shifting role in the world.
WARREN BUFFETT, Chairman and
CEO, Berkshire Hathaway: We do
not have quite the percentage
of the world's GDP that we
had 20 or 30 or 40 years ago,
but we're still the leader.
The question is whether we
can be the moral leader, as
well as the economic leader.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: This final day
of the Supreme Court term has
revived a controversial item
on President Trump's
agenda: his travel ban.
The justices announced that
they will hear arguments this
fall on the constitutionality
of the ban.
In the meantime, they reinstated
a limited version of the
order, affecting travelers
from six mostly-Muslim
countries.
Mr. Trump lauded the Supreme
Court's action today as --
quote -- "a clear victory for
our national security," adding:
"It allows the travel suspension
for the six terror-prone
countries and the refugee
suspension to become
largely effective."
We explore the legal and
practical implications
now with our regular
Supreme Court watcher
Marcia Coyle of "The National
Law Journal," and Alan Gomez.
He covers immigration
for USA Today.
Welcome to you both.
Marcia, let's start with you.
Let's take this one at a time.
We have got two things that
the court was asked to look at
by the Trump administration,
first to grant review
on hearing the arguments
on the executive order.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National
Law Journal": Right, Judy.
The legal challenges
to the executive order
focused on basically two
provisions, the 90-day
travel ban from six
predominantly Muslim
countries and the 120-day
suspension of the U.S. refugee
assistance program.
The government asks the
Supreme Court to review
two federal appellate
court rulings that struck
down the executive order, one,
and they ruled separately,
claiming that the order violated
the Establishment Clause of
the constitution because it
was religious discrimination.
And a second ground was that
the executive order exceeded
the president's authority under
federal immigration
law, a provision, in
particular, that prohibits
discrimination on the basis
of nationality.
The Supreme Court said it would
hear arguments on the merits
of those two appellate court
rulings in October.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meantime
and, separately, the justices
were also asked by the Trump
administration to lift the
injunctions that had been
imposed on the travel ban.
What did they say about that?
MARCIA COYLE: Right.
OK, those two federal appellate
courts had approved injunctions
blocking the travel ban
and the suspension of
the refugee program.
The Supreme Court said that the
bans would be lifted only --
would be applied only against
foreign nationals who had
no bona fide relationship
with an individual or
an entity in the United
States.
And the court went on to explain
that in terms of a bona fide
relationship, it should be
a familial relationship with an
individual or, when it comes to
an entity, a formal documented
relationship, for example, a
student has been accepted at a
university in the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, they were
imposing a -- there had to be
some connection already with the
United States.
MARCIA COYLE: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For
these individuals.
Three justices disagreed
with this partial listing.
What did they say?
MARCIA COYLE: Justice Thomas
wrote for the dissenters and
was joined by Justices Alito
and Gorsuch.
Justice Thomas explained --
he was most in disagreement
about the partial lifting of
the injunctions against
the executive order.
He said it was unworkable,
that it was going to create a
flood gate of litigation as the
government, as government
officials tried to determine
what is a bona fide relationship
with an individual or an entity?
Those three justices would have
kept -- would have allowed the
ban and the executive order
to go into full effect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Alan
Gomez, let me turn to you.
You report, as we said, on
immigration, travel issues.
What is the immediate
effect of this ruling today?
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today: The
immediate effect is that this
travel ban or what's left of
it can go into effect
as early as Thursday.
But it's important to note that,
once it does into effect, this
is going to look very different
from what we saw back in
January, when President
Trump first signed his
first travel ban on
January 27.
If you remember, at the time,
everybody from these countries
was blocked from entering
the country, so people were
stranded at U.S. airports or
blocked from getting onto their
U.S.-bound flights overseas.
But things have changed
dramatically since then.
His revised travel ban
allows for green card
holders to travel, allows
for people who hold
visas to travel.
And now what the Supreme Court
has ordered, this establishing
this bona fide relationship
that Marcia was explaining a
second ago, that's where we're
going to start trying to figure
out -- that's where
the government is going
to start trying to
figure out who can come
in and who cannot.
And so there's a lot of gray
area and we do expect to see
some litigation about this,
because it's -- it's one thing
if you have a relative in the
U.S. who is trying to claim
you.
That person can come in.
If you have a job offer
from a U.S. employer,
that person can come in.
But what if you're just
businessperson coming over here
to have a couple of meetings on
a short-term visa?
Is that a bona
fide relationship?
If you're a tourist who already
has hotel reservations and
plane reservations, is that
a bona fide relationship?
That's what we're going to
start seeing in those first
couple days when the ban finally
goes into effect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
that's my question.
Just how clear are
these guidelines that
the justices set down?
Do we assume immigration
officials are scrambling
today to put this in
black and white to figure
it out?
ALAN GOMEZ: There are a lot of
attorneys within the Department
of Justice and Homeland Security
and the State Department
and a lot of immigration
advocacy attorneys who
are just diving into
whatever case law,
whatever precedents they
can find to figure out
what exactly this bona
fide relationship is.
The justices provided
a few examples that we
have cited already, if
you have a job offer,
if you have been admitted
to a U.S. university and if
you have a direct relative.
But beyond that, it's
pretty much wide open now.
So we're trying to figure
out what that means.
To give some context here, in
2016, about 108,000 people came
to the United States legally
from these six countries.
From a quick accounting of
that, the majority of them will
still be allowed to enter the
country under the guidelines
set forth by the Supreme Court,
because most of those were
refugees, had no direct ties
that we're talking about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
ALAN GOMEZ: But once we get
into some of that other visa
categories that the relationship
is a little bit more tenuous,
that is what has to play out
in the next few weeks, to
see what government determines
to be a bona fide relationship
and whether the courts agree
with them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very final
quick question, Alan.
The travel ban that was issued
by the president last March was
intended to be temporary while
the government figured
out vetting procedures.
They said it was
going to take 90 days.
Where does that stand?
ALAN GOMEZ: Well, that review
finally started last week.
In a separate ruling, the
Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of
Appeals in San Francisco sort of
separated that vetting review
from this legal case that we're
going through right now and
said that the administration can
start conducting that review.
In short, what they're trying
to do is gauge what kind of
information we get from foreign
governments to screen people
coming into the country.
So they just started
doing that last Monday.
And so, right, the
clock starts now.
They have -- they're going to
review it for 20 days, submit
a list to the president.
Then those governments will have
50 days to get off the list.
And at the conclusion
of that vetting review,
then the president can
decide whether he wants
to impose more or fewer travel
restrictions against different
countries around the country
- - or world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Alan Gomez, USA Today,
Marcia Coyle, thank you both.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Judy.
ALAN GOMEZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news: The Supreme Court
also announced that it will
decide a case pitting gay
rights against religion.
At issue is whether
a Denver baker acted
legally when he refused
to sell a same-sex couple
a wedding cake.
He cited his religious beliefs.
In another case, the
justices ruled 7-2 that a
church-run school in Missouri
may seek taxpayer-funded
grants for a new playground.
President Trump has again
accused former President
Obama of failing to stop
Russian interference
in the 2016 election.
On Twitter today, he charged:
"The reason that President
Obama did nothing is that he
expected Hillary
Clinton would win.
He didn't choke.
He colluded or obstructed."
Mr. Trump insisted
investigators have no
evidence that his campaign
aides colluded with Russia.
British Prime Minister Theresa
May struck a deal with a
Northern Ireland party today
to bolster her
minority government.
May's Conservatives
lost their majority in
this month's election.
Now they have agreed to provide
some $1.3 billion in extra
funding to Northern Ireland.
That's in return for the
Democratic Unionist Party's
10 votes in Parliament.
British officials now say that
75 high-rise buildings tested
for fire safety, have failed.
The testing began after
London's Grenfell Tower fire.
The siding on that building
may have fueled the blaze.
The other buildings tested so
far are all over the country.
It is not clear how long it
will take to fix the problem.
In China: Nobel peace laureate
Liu Xiaobo has been released
from prison to a hospital
after being diagnosed with
late-stage liver cancer.
Liu has been a leading
dissident for decades.
In 2009, he was sentenced
to 11 years on a charge
of inciting subversion.
But his lawyer says that
today's release means little.
MO SHAOPING, Attorney for Liu
Xiaobo (through translator):
In principle, he will not be
allowed to see guests, or
visitors, because of the
special nature of his case.
Under medical parole, a
person is still serving a
term while being treated
in a medical facility,
even if it's outside of prison.
Liu Xiaobo's case is special.
I don't think the authorities
will allow him to have visitors.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Liu won the
Nobel Peace Prize in 2010 for
his efforts demanding greater
political freedoms and an end
to one-party rule in China.
Back in this country, the
family of Philando Castile has
reached a $3 million settlement
over his fatal shooting by
a Minnesota police officer.
Castile, a black man, was killed
during a traffic stop last year.
The officer was acquitted
this month of manslaughter
before being fired by
the city of St. Anthony.
Takata Corporation has filed
for bankruptcy protection over
faulty air bag inflators linked
to at least 16 deaths worldwide.
The company faces tens
of billions of dollars
in costs and liabilities
stemming from recalls
and lawsuits.
The filings today in the U.S.
and Japan clear the way for a
rival company to take over most
of Takata's assets.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
14 points to close at 21409.
The Nasdaq fell 18, and the
S&P 500 added a fraction.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a crucial checkup for Republican
senators' health care
bill; showing the Syrian
refugee crisis in a new light
through comic drawings; and much
more.
It was a big day in the fight
over health care reform in the
United States and the Senate's
push to replace Obamacare.
John Yang digs in
to the details.
JOHN YANG: Late today,
the Congressional Budget
Office issued its analysis
of the Senate health
care bill.
It found that, by 2026,
22 million more Americans
would be uninsured
than under current law.
It would also reduce the
federal deficit by $321
billion over that period.
Now, that estimate of uninsured
Americans is slightly lower
than the CBO projection
for the House version,
which passed in May.
But a rising tide of opposition
is adding to the difficult
dynamics of trying to pass
the Senate bill this week.
Joining me now to break all
this down, Julie Rovner.
She's the chief Washington
correspondent for
Kaiser Health Care News.
And our own Lisa Desjardins.
Lisa, Julie, thanks
for joining us.
Julie, let me start with you.
Drill down a little bit for us
in that number of uninsured.
And also what did it say
about the effect on premiums?
JULIE ROVNER, Kaiser Health
News: Well, basically, what the
CBO said is that even though the
Senate bill is different in
many, many ways from the House
bill, they end up in roughly
the same place in terms
of number of people
who would be uninsured.
Basically, both of the bills
would double the percentage
of people without insurance
compared to the
Affordable Care Act.
One of the sort of remarkable
things that it found is that
it would do it for different
reasons and in different ways.
For example, the Senate bill
would peg its help with people
paying premiums to a less
valuable plan, a plan
that would pay fewer of
people's medical expenses.
And what they found is that
for a lot of low-income
people, even if they get
help paying the premium,
they wouldn't buy insurance
because they wouldn't have any
help using their insurance.
The deductibles and
the other cost-sharing
would just be too high.
JOHN YANG: Lisa, you
were just on a conference
call with the CBO.
What did you learn?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think that
is the standout point here.
We know who these
uninsured people would be.
The 22 million that you just
spoke about, John, those are
mostly low-income Americans
and some on the edge
of middle class.
We're talking about $30,000
in income for an individual.
So, that's not poverty.
That's twice the
level of poverty.
The CBO found here that some
of those groups, people making
under $30,000 a year, would
go from about 10 do 15 percent
uninsured, maybe 20 percent,
to maybe 40 percent of the
people making $30,000 or
less would be uninsured
under this plan.
So, that's a big hit
to that one group.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, of
course, you're usually up
on Capitol Hill for us.
What does this report do to
the calculus of trying to get
50 votes by the end of this
week to pass this
bill in the Senate?
LISA DESJARDINS: Today
started, and it was
already very tough math.
In fact, many of my sources all
day were saying they were not
sure how Senate Leader McConnell
could do it.
This makes it even
more difficult.
We have had reaction
in just the last hour.
Rand Paul has now said that
he's going to vote not just
against the bill, but to even
the idea of bringing it up.
That's a procedural vote that
we expect maybe Wednesday
called motion to proceed.
If they can't get 51 votes
for even starting this debate
on that bill, it's a very bad
sign.
We're seeing "makes me
concerned" comments from
Senator Cassidy of Louisiana.
John McCain said this is
obviously not good news.
Across the board,
this is definitely not
helping Republicans.
It's not clear how this
gets across the finish line.
JOHN YANG: And, of course, the
51st vote would likely be the
vice president, who would break
a tie.
Julie, it wasn't just the CBO
that came out today, but there
were -- so there was other
bad news for this
Senate bill today.
JULIE ROVNER: Well,
there was also a plethora
of interest groups.
Most of the health care industry
has actually come out and
said they really don't -- they
don't like the way this -- the
direction this bill was going.
Some of them
vehemently oppose it.
Some, including like the
National Governors Association
-- this is the bipartisan group
which is barely agrees
on anything -- at least
came out and said we
don't think it should
be done this fast.
The National Association
of Medicaid Directors,
the people who would
be involved in actually
implementing the change to this
bill, came out with a very,
very strong statement saying
that no amount of flexibility
can make up for the dollar
amount of cuts to the Medicaid
program in this bill.
According to the CBO, it's
26 percent over 10 years.
JOHN YANG: And, Julie,
the Senate made a change
to this bill today.
What did they do and
why did they do it?
JULIE ROVNER: That's right.
The Senate -- the original
Senate draft that we
saw last week required
insurers to continue
to sell to people who have
preexisting health conditions,
but there was nothing in it to
encourage or urge healthy people
to actually buy insurance.
So they put in today or at
least what the CBO scored what
they call a six-month lockout.
So, if you had any kind of break
in coverage of more than 60
days in the previous 12 months,
you would have to wait six
months before you could get
coverage under this new bill.
JOHN YANG: So, Lisa, you say
we need 50 votes in the Senate.
They have got five already
saying they're against it.
You have got a lot on the fence.
Who should we be watching?
Who will tell us in the
next 48 hours whether or
not this is going to pass?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right
now, almost every
Republican senator is key.
But the one I'm watching the
most closely is Senator Shelley
Capito of West Virginia.
Think about her state.
Mr. Trump, President Trump,
won that state by 42 points.
If he cannot get a bill across
the finish line in a state
with that much support, there's
a real problem.
She has serious health
problems in that state, among
them, the opioid epidemic.
She wants more money
in this bill for that.
We will see if she gets it.
But that might not be enough.
She has a huge
Medicaid population.
She's not the only one, John.
I really ran a lot of
the statistics here.
Think about this.
Almost half of the Republicans
in the Senate have states
where 20 percent of their whole
population is on Medicaid.
That's something they're taking
very seriously with this bill.
JOHN YANG: Julie, are we likely
to see more changes in this
bill as they try to get to
that 50-vote mark?
JULIE ROVNER: Oh, absolutely.
One thing that the CBO -- I
guess one piece of good news
for the Republican in the Senate
is that the Senate bill
would save considerably more
money than the House bill.
So, in theory, they
have money to play with.
We would expect more money
to be devoting towards
helping the opioid epidemic.
They could make more changes.
The problem, the difficulty
is that any change
that moves towards the
more moderate numbers
will harden the opposition,
the more conservative,
and any change that
make the conservatives
happy will harden the
opposition of the moderates.
So, question, they only
have two votes to spare.
Finding 50 votes,
not an easy thing.
JOHN YANG: Well, it will be a
drama all week as we get toward
Friday and the self-imposed
deadline.
Julie Rovner, Lisa Desjardins,
thank you very much.
JULIE ROVNER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
thank you, John.
And as we have heard, a number
of patient groups and major
players in the health care
industry have opposed
the Senate bill.
Every major hospital
group has criticized it.
They say they are especially
worried about deep reductions
in Medicaid spending for the
poor and those with
disabilities, changes
that include new limits
like spending caps
or block grants that would
eventually cut the number
of people on Medicaid.
Hospitals say they will end
up paying the difference
by treating the uninsured.
While I was in Colorado for the
Aspen Spotlight Health Festival
last week, I spoke with Kenneth
Davis.
He's president and CEO of the
Mount Sinai Health System,
which includes seven hospitals
and more than 140
ambulatory centers and
practices in New York.
Dr. Ken Davis, thank you very
much for talking with us.
You were quoted recently as
commenting on the House version
of the Republican overhaul
of the Affordable Care Act.
You said it would have
a fairly devastating
effect on the country.
Is that the way you feel
about the Senate version too?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS, President
and CEO, Mount Sinai
Health System: Absolutely.
I think, if anything, there are
aspects of the Senate bill that
can be even more problematic.
Particularly, the glide path
to per capita or block grants
is going to produce a lower
reimbursement for the states
than was even in the House bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about
the effect on hospitals?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well, there
are a number of things
that impact hospitals.
All of them collectively,
particularly for hospitals that
have a reasonable number of
Medicaid patients,
are pretty difficult.
There are substantial cuts.
For instance, the public
hospitals -- the Health and
Hospital Corporation in New York
City, they can't possibly
sustain these cuts to
the Medicaid budget.
Other hospitals that
have a large number of
Medicaid patients have
a very tiny margin.
That margin evaporates
with this bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is that
-- even with tweaking,
you're saying there's
literally no way around?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well,
fundamentally, this
bill is about decreasing
Medicaid and decreasing
what states receive for
Medicaid and decreasing,
in the House case, those
who have the extended
benefits or the eligibility that
they previously didn't have.
The bill isn't that much
around tweaks to Obamacare.
It's a little bit.
It's a bit to tweak the
exchanges, but the money's
coming from Medicaid.
And unless they take
a completely different
approach to Medicaid,
I don't see that tweaks
are going to help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, there are
observers of the health care
system who look at all this,
and they say hospitals are
a big part of the problem.
They're consolidating.
There are mergers.
Doctors are cutting
deal with hospitals.
Everybody's making more money.
Hospitals are charging more.
What could hospitals do that
they aren't doing now to get
some of these costs down?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well,
let's remember all
hospitals are not alike.
In many cases, geography
is destiny in hospitals.
So if you're in a system like
ours, in which the vast majority
of our payments are either
Medicaid or Medicare,
that's fixed.
And the size of our hospital
system isn't going to change
how much Medicaid reimbursement
or Medicare
reimbursement we get.
Additionally, as some systems
have increased in size, they
have done so in order that they
can move away from
fee-for-service medicine
to what's called value.
To do that, to be a system
that can take risk and value,
you have to be large enough so
that patients don't
escape your network.
And that's part of the thing
that is driving consolidation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is enough
being done, you think,
to be mindful of costs?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well, the margins
in many hospitals are so small
that, if you are not fixated
on costs, you are bankrupt.
And in New York state, we
have seen 30-plus hospitals
go bankrupt in recent years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So the lesson is?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: The lesson is,
we are focused on expenses.
We have to be
fixated on expenses.
But what we really need to do
-- and we were trying to do
this previously -- and hopefully
we can continue to do this
-- is ask, how can we deliver
health care in a different,
more efficient,
cost-efficient way?
The system is failing us.
The macroeconomics of
health care are such
that the government can't
afford it, the states
can't afford it, the employers
can't afford it, and the
employees can't afford it.
What we have got to ask is,
what's wrong with the system
and how do we change it so that
it's more efficient
for everybody?
JUDY WOODRUFF: You
brought up Medicaid.
You were saying how much of this
legislation is around Medicaid.
There are many who say that
the Medicaid expansion that
was part of the Affordable
Care Act originally,
which I know you were
strongly for, the critics
say this was simply throwing
money at an inefficient
program, poor-quality care,
people on Medicaid don't get the
same level of care that others
do.
And they point to studies
showing that, even with the
expansion of Medicaid, that that
care is not getting much better.
How do you respond?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well, those
studies or study doesn't
take a very long perspective.
You can't see the difference
in things like mortality
for quite some time.
If you're lowering
people's hemoglobin A1c
or better controlling
their blood pressure,
it can take sometimes years
before you see an extension of
a lifespan in those patients.
But what we did find,
what was reported was an
improvement in mental health.
And it seems like people
have forgotten that.
The largest provider of
payment for addiction
services is Medicaid.
Twenty percent of all Medicaid
recipients, at the very least,
have mental health problems.
To take that out of the equation
is very, very destructive.
And to think that we're not
having a positive influence --
because the only thing we really
directly affect and that
we can measure short-term
is improvement in mental
health -- is a little
demeaning to our psychiatrists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me go back
to the mega-question about our
whole -- our health care system.
What conservatives are arguing,
among other things, is that
when you have health care,
rising costs of health care
driving at least a sixth of the
economy, that something's really
out of whack, that the whole
system is too expensive,
too out of control.
Government participating
in it is helping to
drive up those costs.
Do they have a point?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Not really.
We lose money on every Medicaid
patient who walks through our
door, whether it's inpatient
or outpatient.
That's the cost of health care.
If they were truly interested
in the question of why is our
system so expensive, this would
be a bill about how we move
away from fee-for-service
medicine, in which
physicians and hospitals
get paid for everything they
do, and moving more toward value
and risk, in which patients,
providers are all aligned, such
that everyone wants you to stay
well and out of the hospital.
We would have more incentives
for readmission penalties.
We would have incentives
for shorter stay.
We would have more incentives to
bring care to a less expensive
place, like the ambulatory
setting.
But those issues aren't
being addressed in this bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And your
point is conservatives may
make that argument, but
they're not promoting...
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: If they are
truly interested in changing
the cost structure, making it
more efficient and less
expensive, they have
got to deal with reforms
that actually affect
those metrics.
And these don't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Ken Davis,
we thank you very much.
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
the first part of my interview
with Warren Buffett on the
nation's shifting economy;
and it's Politics Monday --
Tamara Keith and Stu Rothenberg
look ahead to a busy
week on the Hill.
But first: a unique look at
the victims of war in Syria.
In 2015, Canada began
that country's largest
refugee resettlement
program since the Vietnam
War.
Over the last year-and-a-half,
45,000 Syrian refugees have
made Canada their home, more
than double those
admitted in the U.S.
Now a group of comic book
artists are documenting refugee
stories through their art.
Special correspondent Stefan
Labbe and producer Lauren
Kaljur have the story.
STEFAN LABBE: In 2011,
Mohammed Alsaleh joined
the wave of anti-government
protesters sweeping
across Syria.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH, Syrian
Immigrant: It was the first
time in my life where I hear my
voice saying the word
freedom in public.
It was the first time in Syrian
history where a picture of
our dictator is being torn in
public.
And I was taking that shot.
That was one of the most
amazing days of my life.
STEFAN LABBE: That footage
would prove his undoing, as
the government began to crack
down on protesters.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: Now
they are attacking us.
STEFAN LABBE: Now a refugee in
Canada, Mohammed finally has
the chance to tell his story,
with the help of a nonprofit
graphic arts collective.
JONATHON DALTON, Comic
Book Artist: Cloudscape
finds people who have
come to Canada as refugees
and matches them with
comic book artists.
STEFAN LABBE: Jonathon Dalton
is an established comic artist.
He usually draws stories about
fantasy and historical fiction.
But this time, Mohammed's
life is on the page, a story
that begins with revolution.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: I was studying
medicine at Homs University
during the Arab Spring.
The first time I was
arrested was for filming
pro-democracy protests.
So, protesters would have
a flag with three stars.
JONATHON DALTON:
Three stars, OK.
I wasn't paying close
enough attention.
STEFAN LABBE: With funding from
the government, the comic book
artists will work closely with
refugees to create a
massive one-page comic.
JONATHON DALTON: This is
your story, so I want you to
have as much control over how
it's told as possible.
STEFAN LABBE: When they're
finished, the refugees'
story will be displayed
in bus shelters all
over Vancouver, Canada.
JONATHON DALTON: By drawing
people as cartoons, I
think you can engage the
reader to see themselves
in the story.
STEFAN LABBE: But it's about
more than putting yourself
in a refugee's shoes.
For Mohammed, comics have the
power to animate a humanitarian
crisis many have grown numb
to.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: When you
try your best to share a story
about the worst crisis after
World War II, sometimes, you
feel that language is not
actually capable of doing that.
JONATHON DALTON: I think
that's what I drew.
STEFAN LABBE: After shooting the
protest footage, Mohammed had
no idea his future would take
a dark turn.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: I
tried my best to say
out of trouble, but...
STEFAN LABBE: Assad's security
forces stormed Mohammed's
classroom as he was writing an
exam.
He was charged with terrorism
for documenting the uprising.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: Those pictures
that I was able to upload
were all over the news, all
over the world.
STEFAN LABBE: Mohammed
was blindfolded and
shuttled off to one of the
regime's many detention
centers.
Over the next 150 days, the
guards would deprive him of food
and sleep, chain him from the
ceiling and beat him
inside of a tire.
And when he wasn't being
tortured, he was crammed into
small rooms with dozens of other
prisoners.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH:
I survived, yes.
They managed to change me.
They managed to terrorize me.
STEFAN LABBE: Mohammed was
released from prison when
his brother bribed a judge.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: When I got
my freedom back, all I wanted
to do was see my family.
I also wanted to say goodbye.
I needed to get as
far away as I could.
STEFAN LABBE: He jumped into
a taxi and fled to Lebanon.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: When you're
on survival mode, like where
you're not whole, it was
because of that, that I
decided to leave Syria.
It was because of that I decided
that I'm not going to risk
being detained and tortured
again.
STEFAN LABBE: He would soon be
chosen as one of the first 200
Syrian refugees to be granted
asylum in Canada.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: When I
arrived in Vancouver, I had
only the clothes on my back.
STEFAN LABBE: Three
years on, he's built a
life for himself here.
Now Mohammed helps other
refugees newly arrived
in the city, people like
Osama, who just arrived
from Syria with his
wife and four kids.
Today, Mohammed is
helping them start over.
He signs them up for health
insurance, helps them open a
bank account, and teaches them
how to withdraw
money from an ATM.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: Withdraw.
STEFAN LABBE: But with
the cartoon project, he
wants to reach beyond
the refugee community.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: I think it's
very important to, you know,
share my story, other immigrants
to share their stories as well,
in order to demonstrate we have
this beautiful place because
we welcome others, because
we are the positive example
in a -- in a very bad world.
STEFAN LABBE: With his
family scattered across
Turkey and Germany, and
anti-immigrant movements
on the size, Mohammed is
focused on one thing, reuniting
his family here in Canada.
For "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Stefan Labbe in Vancouver.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, to
part one of my interview
with Warren Buffett.
He's one of the shrewdest and
most successful investors in
the world, earning the nickname
the Oracle of Omaha.
I traveled to Nebraska
last week for this
wide-ranging conversation.
And a note: Buffett is CBO of
Berkshire Hathaway, which owns
BNSF Railway, one of the funders
of the "NewsHour."
He's number two on Forbes'
list of the world's
wealthiest people, worth
more than $75 billion.
Warren Buffett is an
investing rock star to
his Berkshire Hathaway
shareholders, who gather
in Omaha every year.
One share is trading
today at $251,000.
Two years ago, the legendary
firm celebrated its record of
investment over a half-century,
a portfolio that includes Kraft
Heinz, Geico, Wells Fargo,
Coca-Cola and, among others,
the Nebraska Furniture Mart.
It's the largest furniture
store in North America.
Buffet bought it in 1983
from Rose Blumkin, a
Russian immigrant who
built it from nothing.
WARREN BUFFETT, Chairman
and CEO, Berkshire Hathaway:
There's nothing like it.
And we're the 58th market in the
United States, and this was the
largest home furnishing store
in the country, until
we built two more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why
was she so successful?
What was the secret?
WARREN BUFFETT: She would say --
she had a thing in her office,
which you probably couldn't
read, but it says she
had two things, sell
cheap and tell the truth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We talked on the
showroom floor surrounded by
sofas, lamps and coffee tables.
The state of the economy
was our first topic.
The stock market's booming.
Unemployment rate is,
what, is as low as it's
been in 15, 16 years.
But we're still not
seeing the growth that
people would like to see.
What's going on?
WARREN BUFFETT: The economy
is doing well, but all
Americans aren't doing well.
But we have got $57,000 or
$58,000 of GDP per person.
That is a lot of stuff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And yet
the growth, the rate of
growth is, what, 2 percent.
WARREN BUFFETT: Yes, 2 percent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
is saying we're going to get
it up a lot higher than that.
Is that doable?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, it may
be occasionally it happens.
But, no, I don't think
probably on average we will
have that kind of growth.
But 2 percent does
wonders for you, Judy.
If you take 2 percent,
we have a half-a-percent
population growth, and we
have a little immigration,
but 2 percent in one generation
will add $19,000 of GDP per
person, family of four, $76,000
in one generation.
So, your children and
your children's children
and all that, they
will live far, far, far
better than we live
with 2 percent growth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me
then ask you a little bit about
the employment picture, because
it is, as you ISIS
, low unemployment.
People -- a lot of
people have jobs.
At the same time, we're
told the labor participation
rate is lower than what
the experts like it
to be.
WARREN BUFFETT: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More people are
leaving jobs than are joining.
Are we seeing some
kind of shift?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, we always
see shifts in employment.
If you think about it, if you go
back to 1800, it took 80 percent
of the labor force to produce
enough food for the country.
Now it takes less
than 3 percent.
Well, the truth is that market
systems move people around.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also see,
though, some experts saying
that not enough -- there aren't
enough workers out there who
know -- who have the skills to
do all the jobs that are needed.
WARREN BUFFETT: Well,
there's always a mismatch.
I mean, you know, as
the economy evolves, it
reallocates resources.
Now, the real problem, in my
view, is -- this has been -- the
prosperity has been unbelievable
for the extremely rich people.
If you go to 1982, when Forbes
put on their first 400 list,
those people had $93 billion.
They now they have $2.4
trillion, 25 for one.
That is -- this has
been a prosperity that's
been disproportionately
rewarding to the people
on top.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are we
stuck forever with some
measure inequality?
WARREN BUFFETT: No, we generally
have translated greater output
in the few hours of work per
week over the last century.
And that's a good
trend of the future.
But we do have to have a system
that, as output of goods and
services keeps increasing per
capita, that it takes care of
the people who are willing to
work and really are not getting
by very well with a
family on a 40-hour week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You come
across as optimistic about
the future of this country.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think you
wrote to your shareholders
last year it's been a
mistake to bet against
the United States for
the last 240 years.
Has the U.S. standing, though,
in the world been -- has it
been changed, has it been harmed
in any way, given what's
been going on for the
last six or eight months?
WARREN BUFFETT: We do not
have quite the percentage
of the world's GDP
that we had 20 or 30 or
40 years ago, but
we're still the leader.
The question is whether we
can be the moral leader, as
well as the economic leader.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
what do you think?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well,
I think that's a podium
that we should have.
We will be the economic
leader, and we should
be the moral leader.
We should stand for more
than the fact that we're
the wealthiest country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And do you
think we are right now?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, sometimes,
we are and sometimes we aren't.
(LAUGHTER)
WARREN BUFFETT: I didn't think
what happened on the Paris
agreement was a good idea.
We have to live with
the rest of the world.
And it's a mistake, in my view.
Trade has generally
developed in this country.
We actually export 12 or
13 percent of our GDP.
It was only 5 percent in 1970.
But it benefits us.
It benefits the
rest of the world.
It doesn't benefit the
steelworker maybe in Ohio.
And that's the problem that has
to be addressed, because when
you have something that's good
for society, but terribly
harmful for given individuals,
we have got to make sure those
individuals are taken care of.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask
you about a couple questions
about markets, investing.
I mean, nobody knows
markets better than you do.
I think you said earlier this
year that you weren't worried
that the market was in a bubble,
because interest rates
were staying low.
As you know, the Federal Reserve
is starting to raise them.
Do you still feel the
market is not in a bubble?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, anything
can happen in markets.
I bought my first stock in
1942, in the summer of '42.
I was 11 years old.
And so 75 years have gone by.
And I have never known
what the market's going
to do the next day.
And that's not my game.
My game is to decide whether
I'm in the right economy, which
America's definitely been ever
since that time.
The Dow has gone from
121000 during that time.
And no matter what the headlines
say, or terrible things are
happening -- we were losing the
war in the Pacific when
I first bought stocks.
So, America's going
to do fine over time.
America business is going
Occasionally, we go off the
tracks with bubbles like -- and
a lot of human error and that
sort of thing.
But it will never
permanently derail us.
And I don't try and guess when
to get in and out of the market.
I have owned stocks
consistently since 1942.
I owned the -- I was
buying stocks the day
before the election.
I was buying the same stocks
the day after election.
And if Hillary had been
elected, it would have
been the same thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does President
Trump deserve credit for what
is going on right now in the
market?
WARREN BUFFETT: I -- the
stock market has been going up
basically since March of 2009.
That's when it hit the
bottom, very early in March.
It's been going up more
or less ever since then.
But if I ever get elected
president, I will never claim
credit for anything the market
does, because I don't
want to be blamed when it
goes the other direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Your investment
decisions over time have been
remarkably right much of the
time, most of the time.
Today, as people look at you
and look at the decisions that
you have made, what mainly
should people take a look at?
WARREN BUFFETT: They should
be willing to bet on America.
They shouldn't listen to a lot
of jabbering about what the
market's going to do tomorrow
or next week or next month,
because nobody knows.
They should just keep buying
and buying and buying a little
bit of America as they go
along.
And 30 or 40 years from now,
they will have a lot of money.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Berkshire
Hathaway has made a huge
investment in Wells Fargo.
WARREN BUFFETT: True.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
-- it came up at your
recent shareholders
meeting that Wells Fargo
had problems.
They engaged in some...
WARREN BUFFETT:
Plenty of problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
They engaged in some fake
accounts, in millions
of fake accounts.
The leadership of the
company was replaced.
WARREN BUFFETT: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The critics are
saying, yes, you called them
out, but Berkshire Hathaway
still owns a big
chunk of Wells Fargo.
WARREN BUFFETT: Sure.
Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
they're saying, is
there a double standard?
WARREN BUFFETT: It was
a terrible mistake.
They incentivized bad behavior.
Incentives work, but they
work -- you incentivize good
behavior or bad behavior.
And then the problem,
big problem is -- and
sometimes will you -- you
can design an incentive
system that is incentivizing
the wrong things.
You have got to end it, and
end it fast and decisive.
So, that's where they
made the big mistake.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there a clear
line in your mind when behavior
becomes just so unacceptable
that you don't want
to have anything to
do with that company?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, it's
a very interesting question.
I wouldn't want to
manufacture cigarettes.
But if I owned -- we
do own MDNMostco.
Do they sell them?
Yes.
So I don't have a problem
owning stock in that.
But I just wouldn't want to --
I wouldn't want to do it myself.
I basically think, if
anything is sufficiently
antisocial, society
should do something about
it.
But that's a separate question.
But -- and I don't think
there's any company that I have
seen that's 100 percent pure.
In terms of what I will call
them out for, I will call
individuals out, but generally
I would not apply that
to the corporation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Something that
affects all businesses is the
cost of health care in this
country.
WARREN BUFFETT: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
have been vocal about that.
You have argued that, right
now, in effect, that the cost
of paying for health care can
affect a company
even more than taxes.
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, it
does, I mean, in terms of our
competitiveness in the world.
Health care in 1960
was 5 percent of GDP.
And there's only 100
cents in the dollar.
So, it's gone from 5 cents
-- 5 percent to 17 percent.
And it keeps going up.
Corporate taxes have gone down
from 4 percent to 2 percent.
So, corporate taxes are
way less of a factor in
American competitiveness
than -- I'm talking
about overall business
-- than medical costs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And as
we sit here today in
Omaha, the Republicans
in Congress are madly
trying to figure out what
to do to replace Obamacare,
the Affordable Care Act.
WARREN BUFFETT: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you
have a firm idea in your
mind of what ought to
be done about Obamacare?
Everybody acknowledges there
have been some problems with it.
WARREN BUFFETT: I think
that's way outside of
my circle of competence.
But I would say this.
You can't have that 5 go to
17 and move on to 20 and 22
or 24 percent, because there
are only 100 cents in a dollar.
And health care is gobbling up
well over $3 trillion a year.
It's just about the same
as federal -- the federal
budget is getting up there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are we now at
the point where the country
does need to think about some
sort of single-payer system
in some form or another?
WARREN BUFFETT: With my
limited knowledge, I think that
probably is the best system,
because it is a system --
we are such a rich country.
In a sense, we can
afford to do it.
But in almost every field
of American business, it
pays to bring down costs.
There's an awful lot of people
involved in the medical --
the whole -- just the way the
ecosystem works, that
there is no incentive
to bring down costs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it
sounds like you're saying,
with a single-payer
system, it would be easier
to figure out a way to
get those costs down.
WARREN BUFFETT: It would
be more effective, I think.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tune in
tomorrow night for the second
part of my conversation with
Warren Buffett.
We will look then more at his
own taxes and his views on
tax reform and philanthropy.
Online, you can view Buffett's
very first tax return, filed
when he just 14 years old
for money he earned delivering
newspapers in his then Northwest
Washington, D.C., neighborhood.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
We turn back now to the Supreme
Court's decision to take up the
Trump administration's travel
ban and the ongoing
fight over the health
care replacement bill.
For all that, it's time for
politics Monday with Tamara
Keith of NPR and Stu Rothenberg,
senior editor at
Inside Elections.
And welcome to both of you.
So, Tam, I'm going to start
with you on the Supreme Court
ruling on the travel ban.
It is a limited victory
for the president.
They did allow a
reinstatement of a part of it.
How much of a victory is it?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well, it's a victory.
And the president hasn't
had a lot of victories
on this travel ban.
It's been blocked in
various courts all the way
up to the Supreme Court.
He was 0-2 in the appeals
courts before getting
to the Supreme Court.
Now at least he will be
heard in the Supreme Court.
Now, it is not the 9-0 victory
that the president declared.
There's not a decision yet.
There's only a decision
to hear the case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
do you see it, Stu?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Inside
Elections: Yes, similarly.
I guess everything is a
win or loss, so it's a
win for the president.
I don't see it having dramatic
political implications, frankly.
I think the lines
have been drawn.
You're either for the
ban or against the ban.
To some extent, the
final decision has been
kicked down the road,
the can has been kicked
down the road a bit.
So, I think it's a
win for the president.
But compared to health care,
foreign policy, jobs, the
economy, I just don't see it as
a decisive issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, so
speaking of health care, we know
the debate in the Senate goes
on.
We heard Lisa Desjardins, Julie
Rovner talking with John Yang
earlier talking about where
the state of play is.
Today, Tam, the Congressional
Budget Office weighed in with
-- and saying almost as many
- - 22 million more Americans
would be hurt by this plan,
would lose coverage, which is
almost as many as
the House plan.
Now, you have just heard
there's some reaction to
that from the White House.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
The White House is reacting
much the way that it reacted
the last time the Congressional
Budget Office came out with
one of these blockbuster
reports saying millions
of people would lose
coverage.
And they're saying is that
the CBO hasn't always been
accurate and estimating health
care, so, all right, everyone,
just look in the other
direction, please ignore that.
And the other point that the
statement makes is that the
president said he would repeal
and replace the Affordable Care
Act, and this bill does it,
and, therefore, that's what
they want.
Now, there are some in the
Senate who actually say the bill
doesn't repeal Obamacare, it's
more of a modification of the
preexisting structure, and
that is one of the objections.
There are many out there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu, what is
the political state of play?
What are the pressures on these
Republicans as they try to
decide what to do about this?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, I think
they're in a very difficult
position, a rock and a hard
place.
On one hand, they want
to accomplish something.
They have a mandate from
conservatives, Republicans,
Trump backers to do something.
On the other hand, they're
concerned about opinion back
home and they're concerned about
the coverage.
I got a release from
Mitch -- you got a release
from the White House.
I saw a release from
Mitch McConnell right
before I came on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm glad we
are all well-covered here.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And he said:
"The Senate will soon take
action on the bill that the
Congressional Budget Office just
confirmed will reduce the growth
in premiums under Obamacare,
reduce taxes on the middle
class, and reduce the deficit."
Premiums, taxes, deficit.
What McConnell didn't
talk about was health
care, quality of coverage.
TAMARA KEITH: Or out-of-pocket
expenses, which this CBO
report says could be massive.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And voters
care about these things.
They care a lot
about these things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Stu, again,
as you -- you follow these, the
political pressures on these
members of the Senate as
they think about - - the ones
who are you for reelection.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Judy, I
was looking at some numbers,
and it's really stunning.
What's the one group, two
groups that are supposed to
benefit most from this health
care bill?
Younger voters and healthier
people, right, because they have
been subsidizing older people
and people who
aren't as healthy.
And what group is most opposed
to the American Health Care
Act and most critical of Donald
Trump?
Eighteen-to-34-year-olds,
younger voters, the kind of
voters that should like this.
So, I think it's a real
problem for Republicans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will
certainly see what happens.
There's so much to ask about.
Tam, the president has been
tweeting a lot over the weekend,
continuing to today, about
the reports that the
Obama administration had
information about Russian
hacking, interference
in last year's presidential
election and didn't do
a lot about it until
after the election.
The president's going after
former President Obama, saying
he's the one to blame, he's
the one who obstructed.
Where does this
get the president?
How successful a
strategy is this?
TAMARA KEITH: The president's
position on Russian hacking
and metaling in the election
is wildly confusing, because,
previously, he had said it
was a hoax that was invented
by the Democrats just to explain
their loss in the election.
Now I guess he's OK with the
hoax, as long as it's President
-- former President Obama's
fault.
And President Trump does have
a remarkable ability to make
everything President Obama's
fault, one way or another.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu, the
president has -- this
has been the monkey on
the president's back
for months and
months and months.
He doesn't like to talk about
it, but it seems as if this
particular report that came out
a couple days ago in
The Washington Post,
he seized on that.
STUART ROTHENBERG: I
think you're right.
He's looking for some
explanation to prove
that he was right and
Obama is wrong, it's
all Obama's fault.
Look, I think President Obama
did -- one thing that Donald
Trump says is correct is that
President Obama did assume that
Hillary Clinton was going to
win the election and that he
could not take on
this issue publicly.
But can you imagine what Donald
Trump would have said if, a
few weeks before election,
Barack Obama got on
television and said it's
all about the Russians
taking over our elections?
Trump would have said, it's
rigged, the election is rigged.
TAMARA KEITH: He already
was saying it was rigged.
And that may have
influenced how the Obama
administration reacted.
That's what they're saying.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, in fact,
privately, that's what the
Obama folks are saying.
Just very quickly, something
that we kind of overlooked in
all the other news last week,
and the was the announcement
by the Supreme Court that
they're going to take up, Stu,
a redistricting case
that affects the census,
that is going to have
a big effect on how
our politics potentially...
STUART ROTHENBERG: This is
huge, or, as some people, say,
"yuge," because this goes to
the very heart of how
districts are drawn,
who draws the districts.
And that goes to the very
heart of who gets elected and
which party benefits from how
the districts are drawn.
So, this is a thing to
absolutely keep an eye on.
The court has been very reticent
to get involved on the issues
of is this a political question
or not?
But by taking the case,
I guess they're going
to address it at least.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
backdrop is that the way
redistricting gerrymandering
has been happening,
Tam, quickly, it has benefited
the Republicans, and this
is a chance to look at that.
TAMARA KEITH: Well, and
redistricting that has made
seats safe is influencing things
like this very health
care debate, because
members of Congress are
more worried, particularly
Republican members of Congress
are more worried about primaries
from the right than they are
about a general election fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
that one's in the fall.
So is the big
travel ban argument.
We're going to have a
lot to look forward to.
But, in the meantime, we have
got so much to cover right now.
Stu Rothenberg, Tamara Keith,
thank you both, Politics Monday.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: A new study
finds that when the news
cycle is packed to the
brim, information overload
can cause people to
struggle to discriminate
between fact-based
stories and fake news.
Learn more about that research.
That's on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later
this evening on PBS.
"POV" kicks off its 30th
season with two films
about Syrian refugees.
"Dalya's Other Country" tells
the story of a young girl who
moved to the United States
from Aleppo five years ago and
how she navigates her native and
adoptive cultures as a Southern
California teenager.
And "4.1 Miles" chronicles a
day in the life of a Greek Coast
Guard captain who makes multiple
trips to save thousands
of migrants from drowning
near the island of Lesbos.
Both "POV" films air later
tonight on most PBS stations.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.